                      Observability
                   and monitoring

This chapter covers

 Logging with Spring Boot, Loki, and Fluent Bit
 Using health probes with Spring Boot Actuator

   and Kubernetes
 Producing metrics with Spring Boot Actuator,

   Prometheus, and Grafana
 Configuring distributed tracing with OpenTelemetry

   and Tempo
 Managing applications with Spring Boot Actuator

     In the previous chapters, you learned about several patterns and technologies you
     can use to build secure, scalable, and resilient applications. However, we still lack
     visibility into the Polar Bookshop system, especially when something goes wrong.
     Before going to production, we should ensure our applications are observable and
     that the deployment platform provides all the tools needed to monitor and gain
     insights into the system.

          Monitoring involves checking the telemetry available for the application and
     defining alerts for known failure states. Observability goes beyond that and aims at
     reaching a state where we can ask arbitrary questions about the system without

                                                          447

                                    Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
448   CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

      knowing the question in advance. The product team should ensure their applications
      expose relevant information; and the platform team should provide an infrastructure
      for consuming that information and asking questions about their operations.

          As you'll remember from chapter 1, observability is one of the properties of cloud
      native applications. Observability is a measure of how well we can infer the internal
      state of an application from its outputs. In chapter 2, you learned about the 15-Factor
      methodology, which contains two factors that help build observable applications. Fac-
      tor 14 suggests treating your applications as space probes and reasoning about what
      kind of telemetry you'd need to monitor and control your applications remotely, such
      as logs, metrics, and traces. Factor 6 recommends treating logs as a stream of events
      rather than dealing with log files.

          In this chapter, you'll learn how to ensure your Spring Boot applications expose
      relevant information to infer their internal states, such as logs, health probes, metrics,
      traces, and additional valuable data regarding schema migrations and builds. I'll also
      show you how to use the Grafana open source observability stack to validate the
      changes you'll make to your applications. However, I won't go into too many details,
      because that's something the platform team deploys and operates.

      NOTE The source code for the examples in this chapter is available in the
      Chapter13/13-begin and Chapter13/13-end folders, which contain the initial
      and final states of the project (https://github.com/ThomasVitale/cloud-native
      -spring-in-action).

13.1  Logging with Spring Boot, Loki, and Fluent Bit

      Logs (or event logs) are discrete records of something that happened over time in a
      software application. They are composed of a timestamp necessary to answer the
      question "when did the event happen?" and some information providing details
      about the event and its context, which lets us answer questions like "what happened
      at this time?", "which thread was processing the event?", or "which user/tenant was
      in the context?"

          During troubleshooting and debugging tasks, logs are among the essential tools we
      can use to reconstruct what happened at a specific point in time in a single applica-
      tion instance. They're usually categorized according to the type or severity of the
      event, such as trace, debug, info, warn, and error. It's a flexible mechanism that lets us log
      only the most severe events in production while still giving us the chance to change
      the log level temporarily during debugging.

          The format of a log record can vary, going from simple plain text to a more organized
      collection of key/value pairs to fully structured records produced in a JSON format.

          Traditionally we've configured logs to be printed out in files located on the host
      machine, which has resulted in applications dealing with filename conventions, file
      rotation, and file sizes. In the cloud we follow the 15-Factor methodology, which rec-
      ommends treating logs as events streamed to the standard output. Cloud native appli-
      cations stream logs and are not concerned with how they are processed or stored.

      Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.1 Logging with Spring Boot, Loki, and Fluent Bit                        449

    This section will teach you how to add and configure logs in Spring Boot applica-
tions. Then I'll explain how logs are collected and aggregated in a cloud native infra-
structure. Finally, you'll run Fluent Bit for log collection, run Loki for log aggregation,
and use Grafana to query the logs produced by your Spring Boot applications.

13.1.1 Logging with Spring Boot

          Spring Boot comes with built-in support and auto-configuration for the most common
          logging frameworks, including Logback, Log4J2, Commons Logging, and Java Util
          Logging. By default, Logback is used (https://logback.qos.ch), but you can easily
          replace it with another library thanks to the abstraction provided by the Simple Log-
          ging Facade for Java (SLF4J).

               Using the interfaces from SLF4J (www.slf4j.org), you have the freedom to change
          the logging library without changing your Java code. Furthermore, cloud native appli-
          cations should treat logs as events and stream them to the standard output. That's pre-
          cisely what Spring Boot does out of the box. Convenient, right?

           CONFIGURING LOGGING IN SPRING BOOT
          Event logs are categorized by level with decreasing details and increasing importance:
          trace, debug, info, warn, error. By default, Spring Boot logs everything from the info
          level up.

               A logger is a class that produces log events. You can set logger levels through config-
          uration properties, with options to apply global configurations or to target specific
          packages or classes. For example, in chapter 9 we set a debug logger to get more details
          about the circuit breakers implemented with Resilience4J (in the application.yml file
          in the Edge Service project):

logging:                                        Sets a debug logger
   level:                                       for the Resilience4J
       io.github.resilience4j: debug            library

You might need to configure multiple loggers at the same time. In that case, you can
collect them in a log group and apply the configuration to the group directly. Spring
Boot provides two predefined log groups, web and sql, but you can also define your
own. For example, to better analyze the behavior of the circuit breakers defined in the
Edge Service application, you could define a log group and configure a log level for
both Resilience4J and Spring Cloud Circuit Breaker.

    In the Edge Service project (edge-service), you can configure the new log group in
the application.yml file as follows.

Listing 13.1 Configuring a group to control the circuit breaker logs

logging:                                        Collects multiple loggers
                                                into a group to apply the
   group:                                       same configuration
       circuitbreaker: io.github.resilience4j,

org.springframework.cloud.circuitbreaker

Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
450                           CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     level:                            Sets an "info" logger for both Resilience4J and
        circuitbreaker: info           Spring Cloud Circuit Breaker, which is easy to
                                       change if you need to debug the circuit breakers

     By default, each event log provides essential information, including the date and time
     of the occurrence, the log level, the process identifier (PID), the name of the thread
     from which the event was triggered, the logger name, and the log message. If you
     check the application logs from a Terminal that supports ANSI, the log messages will
     also be colored to improve readability (figure 13.1). The logging format can be cus-
     tomized using the logging.pattern configuration property group.

                Default event log format in Spring Boot

     Timestamp  Process ID             Logger name

2022-07-31 21:07:03.394 INFO 3142 --- [main] c.p.c.CatalogServiceApplication : Starting CatalogServiceApplication

                Log level Thread name                                  Log message

Figure 13.1 Event logs include a timestamp, contextual information, and a message about what happened.

        NOTE Spring Boot provides extensive options for configuring logging to
        files. Since that's not useful for cloud native applications, I won't cover it in
        this book. If you're interested in the subject, see the official documentation to
        learn more about log files (http://spring.io/projects/spring-boot).

     ADDING LOGS TO SPRING BOOT APPLICATIONS
     Besides configuring loggers for the frameworks and libraries used in your project, you
     should define event logs in your code whenever applicable. How much logging is
     enough? It depends on the context. In general, I reckon that it's better to have too
     much logging than too little. I've seen many deployments that just contain changes to
     add more logging, while it's pretty rare to see the opposite.

         Thanks to the SLF4J façade, the syntax for defining new event logs in Java is the
     same no matter which logging library you use: a Logger instance created from a
     LoggerFactory. Let's see how it works by adding new log messages to the web control-
     ler in Catalog Service.

         In the Catalog Service project (catalog-service), go to the BookController class,
     define a Logger instance from SLF4J, and add messages to be printed out whenever a
     client calls the application's REST API.

                Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
        13.1 Logging with Spring Boot, Loki, and Fluent Bit                            451

    Listing 13.2 Defining log events using SL4FJ

package com.polarbookshop.catalogservice.web;

import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;
...

@RestController                                                  Defines a logger for
@RequestMapping("books")                                         the BookController
public class BookController {                                    class

   private static final Logger log =                         Logs the given
       LoggerFactory.getLogger(BookController.class);        message at the
                                                             "info" level
   private final BookService bookService;

   @GetMapping
   public Iterable<Book> get() {

       log.info(
          "Fetching the list of books in the catalog"

       );
       return bookService.viewBookList();
   }

   ...
}

NOTE Go ahead and define new loggers and log events for all the applica-
tions composing the Polar Bookshop system wherever it makes sense. As a ref-
erence, you can look at the source code repository accompanying this book
(Chapter13/13-end).

The Mapped Diagnostic Context (MDC)

You'll likely need to add common information to your log messages, such as the iden-
tifier of the currently authenticated user, the tenant for the current context, or the
request URI. You could directly add that information to your log message, as you did
in the previous listing, and it would work, but the data would not be structured.
Instead, I prefer working with structured data.

SLF4J and common logging libraries, like Logback and Log4J2, support adding struc-
tured information depending on the request context (authentication, tenant, thread)
through a tool named Mapped Diagnostic Context (MDC). If you'd like to know more
about MDC, I recommend checking the official documentation for the specific logging
library you're using.

Now that our applications log messages as an event stream, we need to collect and
store them in a central place that we can query. The following section will provide a
solution to accomplish that.

        Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
452  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

13.1.2 Managing logs with Loki, Fluent Bit, and Grafana

          When you move to distributed systems like microservices and complex environments
          like the cloud, managing logs becomes challenging and requires a different solution
          than in more traditional applications. If something goes wrong, where can we find
          data about the failure? Traditional applications would rely on log files stored on the
          host machine. Cloud native applications are deployed in dynamic environments, are
          replicated, and have different life spans. We need to collect the logs from all applica-
          tions running in the environment and send them to a central component where they
          can be aggregated, stored, and searched.

               There are plenty of options for managing logs in the cloud. Cloud providers have
          their own offerings, like Azure Monitor Logs and Google Cloud Logging. There are
          also many enterprise solutions available on the market, such as Honeycomb, Humio,
          New Relic, Datadog, and Elastic.

               For Polar Bookshop, we'll use a solution based on the Grafana observability stack
          (https://grafana.com). It's composed of open source technologies, and you can run it
          yourself in any environment. It's also available as a managed service (Grafana Cloud)
          offered by Grafana Labs.

               The components of the Grafana stack we'll use for managing logs are Loki for log
          storage and search, Fluent Bit for log collection and aggregation, and Grafana for
          log data visualization and querying.

              NOTE Which technology you use for managing logs is a platform choice and
              shouldn't impact the applications at all. For example, you should be able to
              replace the Grafana stack with Humio without making any changes to the
              Polar Bookshop applications.

          We need a log collector to fetch log messages from the standard output of all the run-
          ning applications. Using the Grafana stack, you're free to choose a log collector from
          among several options. For the Polar Bookshop system, we'll use Fluent Bit, an open
          source and CNCF-graduated project that "enables you to collect logs and metrics from
          multiple sources, enrich them with filters, and distribute them to any defined destina-
          tion" (https://fluentbit.io). Fluent Bit is a subproject of Fluentd, "an open source data
          collector for unified logging layer" (www.fluentd.org).

               Fluent Bit will collect logs from all running containers and forward them to Loki,
          which will store them and make them searchable. Loki is "a log aggregation system
          designed to store and query logs from all your applications and infrastructure" (https://
          grafana.com/oss/loki).

               Finally, Grafana will use Loki as a data source and provide log visualization fea-
          tures. Grafana "allows you to query, visualize, alert on and understand" your telemetry,
          no matter where it is stored (https://grafana.com/oss/grafana). Figure 13.2 illustrates
          this logging architecture.

               Let's start by running Grafana, Loki, and Fluent Bit as containers. In your Polar
          Deployment project (polar-deployment), update the Docker Compose configuration

     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
          13.1 Logging with Spring Boot, Loki, and Fluent Bit                               453

                  Logging architecture using the Grafana stack

   Application                                                         Grafana
    [Container]                                                      [Container]
                                                       Platform for querying, visualizing,
Fetches logs from                                        and alerting on metrics, logs,
                                                                      and traces

                                                                 Queries logs from

               Fluent Bit          Forwards logs to                Loki
               [Container]                                     [Container]

Collects, processes, and forwards                      Log aggregation system
                   logs

Figure 13.2 Logging architecture for cloud native applications based on the Grafana stack

(docker/docker-compose.yml) to include the new services. They are configured
through files I have included in the source code repository accompanying this book
(Chapter13/13-end/polar-deployment/docker/observability). Copy the observability
folder over the same path in your own project.

Listing 13.3 Defining containers for Grafana, Loki, and Fluent Bit

version: "3.8"
services:

   ...

grafana:

image: grafana/grafana:9.1.2

container_name: grafana

depends_on:

   - loki                          Username and
ports:                             password to
                                   access Grafana
   - "3000:3000"
environment:                                           Volumes are used to load
                                                       configuration for data
- GF_SECURITY_ADMIN_USER=user                          sources and dashboards.

- GF_SECURITY_ADMIN_PASSWORD=password

volumes:

          - ./observability/grafana/datasource.yml:/etc/grafana/provisioning/

datasources/datasource.yml

          - ./observability/grafana/dashboards:/etc/grafana/provisioning/

dashboards

- ./observability/grafana/grafana.ini:/etc/grafana/grafana.ini

                Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
454                        CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     loki:

     image: grafana/loki:2.6.1

     container_name: loki

     depends_on:

     - fluent-bit

     ports:

     - "3100:3100"

     fluent-bit:                                                    Defines the Loki URL
        image: grafana/fluent-bit-plugin-loki:2.6.1-amd64           used to forward log
                                                                    messages

     container_name: fluent-bit

     ports:                                                         Volumes are used to
        - "24224:24224"                                             load configuration
                                                                    for collecting and
     environment:                                                   delivering logs.
        - LOKI_URL=http://loki:3100/loki/api/v1/push

     volumes:

               - ./observability/fluent-bit/fluent-bit.conf:/fluent-bit/etc/

     fluent-bit.conf

     Next, start all three containers with the following command:

     $ docker-compose up -d grafana

     Thanks to the dependencies defined in Docker Compose between containers, starting
     Grafana will also run Loki and Fluent Bit.

         Fluent Bit can be configured to collect logs from different sources. For Polar Book-
     shop we'll rely on the Fluentd driver available in Docker to collect logs automatically
     from running containers. The Docker platform itself listens to the log events from
     each container and routes them to the specified service. In Docker, a logging driver
     can be configured directly on a container. For example, update the Catalog Service
     configuration in Docker Compose to use the Fluentd logging driver, which will send
     the logs over to the Fluent Bit container.

     Listing 13.4 Using Fluentd driver to route container logs to Fluent Bit

     version: "3.8"

     services:

     ...                       Ensures the Fluent
                               Bit container is
     catalog-service:          started before
        depends_on:            Catalog Service
            - fluent-bit

     - polar-keycloak

     - polar-postgres

     image: "catalog-service"

     container_name: "catalog-service"

     ports:

     - 9001:9001

     - 8001:8001

     environment:

     - BPL_JVM_THREAD_COUNT=50

     - BPL_DEBUG_ENABLED=true

                          Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.1 Logging with Spring Boot, Loki, and Fluent Bit                                   455

- BPL_DEBUG_PORT=8001

- SPRING_CLOUD_CONFIG_URI=http://config-service:8888

          - SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL=

jdbc:postgresql://polar-postgres:5432/polardb_catalog

- SPRING_PROFILES_ACTIVE=testdata

          - SPRING_SECURITY_OAUTH2_RESOURCESERVER_JWT_ISSUER_URI=

http://host.docker.internal:8080/realms/PolarBookshop

logging:               Which logging
   driver: fluentd     driver to use
   options:

               fluentd-address: 127.0.0.1:24224            The address of the Fluent
                                                           Bit instance where the
Section to configure the                                   logs should be routed
container logging driver

Next, package Catalog Service as a container image (./gradlew bootBuildImage),
and run the application container as follows:

$ docker-compose up -d catalog-service

Thanks to the dependencies defined in Docker Compose between containers, Key-
cloak and PostgreSQL will automatically be started as well.

    Now we're ready to test the logging setup. First, send a few requests to Catalog
Service to trigger the generation of some log messages:

$ http :9001/books

Next, open a browser window, head to Grafana (http://localhost:3000), and use the
credentials configured in Docker Compose to log in (user/password). Then select
the Explore page from the left menu, choose Loki as the data source, choose Last 1
Hour from the time drop-down menu, and run the following query to search for all
the logs produced by the catalog-service container:

{container_name="/catalog-service"}

The result should be similar to what you can see in figure 13.3, showing the logs from
application startup as well as the custom log messages you added to the BookController
class.

    When you're done testing the logging setup, stop all containers with docker-
compose down.

   NOTE Following the same approach, update the Docker Compose configura-
   tion for all the other Spring Boot applications in the Polar Bookshop system
   to use the Fluentd logging driver and rely on Fluent Bit for collecting logs. As
   a reference, you can look at the source code repository accompanying this
   book (Chapter13/13-end/polar-deployment/docker).

Logs provide some information about how an application behaves, but they're not
enough to infer its internal state. The next section will cover how you can make appli-
cations expose more data about their health status.

                    Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
456   CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

Figure 13.3 In Grafana, you can browse and search log messages aggregated and stored by Loki.

13.2  Health probes with Spring Boot Actuator
      and Kubernetes

      Once an application is deployed, how can we tell if it's healthy? Is it capable of han-
      dling new requests? Did it enter a faulty state? Cloud native applications should pro-
      vide information about their health so that monitoring tools and deployment
      platforms can detect when there's something wrong and act accordingly. We need
      dedicated health endpoints to check on the status of the application and any compo-
      nents or services it might use.

          The deployment platform can periodically invoke health endpoints exposed by
      applications. A monitoring tool could trigger an alert or a notification when an appli-
      cation instance is unhealthy. In the case of Kubernetes, the platform will check the
      health endpoints and automatically replace the faulty instance or temporarily stop
      sending traffic to it until it's ready to handle new requests again.

           For Spring Boot applications, you can leverage the Actuator library to expose
      information about their health through a /actuator/health HTTP endpoint, includ-
      ing details about the application's status and the components in use, like databases,
      event brokers, and config servers.

      Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
       13.2 Health probes with Spring Boot Actuator and Kubernetes                     457

    Spring Boot Actuator is a useful library, providing many endpoints for monitoring
and managing Spring Boot applications. Such endpoints can be exposed through
HTTP or JMX, but either way we must protect them from unauthorized access. We'll
limit ourselves to using the HTTP endpoints, so we can use Spring Security to define
access policies like those for any other endpoint we've worked with so far.

    This section will cover configuring health endpoints in Spring Boot applications
using Actuator. You'll then see how you can define liveness and readiness probes so
Kubernetes can use its self-healing functionality.

13.2.1 Defining health probes for Spring Boot applications
          using Actuator

          First of all, open the build.gradle file in the Catalog Service project (catalog-service),
          and ensure that it contains a dependency on Spring Boot Actuator (we used it in
          chapter 4 for refreshing configuration at runtime).

Listing 13.5 Adding dependency for Spring Boot Actuator in Catalog Service

dependencies {
   ...
   implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-actuator'

}

There are a few viable solutions for protecting the Spring Boot Actuator endpoints.
For example, you could enable HTTP Basic authentication just for the Actuator end-
points, while all the others will keep using OpenID Connect and OAuth2. For simplic-
ity, in the Polar Bookshop system, we'll keep the Actuator endpoints unauthenticated
from inside the Kubernetes cluster and block any access to them from the outside (as
you'll see in chapter 15).

   WARNING In a real production scenario, I would recommend protecting
   access to the Actuator endpoints even from within the cluster.

Go to the SecurityConfig class of your Catalog Service project and update the Spring
Security configuration to allow unauthenticated access to the Spring Boot Actuator
endpoints.

Listing 13.6 Allowing unauthenticated access to the Actuator endpoints

@EnableWebSecurity                                  Allows unauthenticated access
public class SecurityConfig {                         to any Spring Boot Actuator
                                                                             endpoint

@Bean

SecurityFilterChain filterChain(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {

return http

.authorizeHttpRequests(authorize -> authorize

       .mvcMatchers("/actuator/**").permitAll()

       .mvcMatchers(HttpMethod.GET, "/", "/books/**").permitAll()

       .anyRequest().hasRole("employee")

)

             Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
458                                 CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

              .oauth2ResourceServer(OAuth2ResourceServerConfigurer::jwt)
              .sessionManagement(sessionManagement -> sessionManagement

                 .sessionCreationPolicy(SessionCreationPolicy.STATELESS))
              .csrf(AbstractHttpConfigurer::disable)
              .build();
        }
     }

     Finally, open the application.yml file in your Catalog Service project (catalog-service),
     and configure Actuator to expose the health HTTP endpoint. If you followed the
     examples in chapter 4, you might have an existing configuration for the refresh end-
     point. In that case, go ahead and replace it with the health endpoint.

     Listing 13.7 Exposing the health Actuator endpoint

     management:                    Exposes the
        endpoints:                  /actuator/health
            web:                    endpoint via HTTP
               exposure:
                   include: health

     Let's check the result. First we need to run all the backing services used by Catalog
     Service: Config Service, Keycloak, and PostgreSQL. We'll run them as containers.
     Package Config Service as a container image (./gradlew bootBuildImage). Then
     open a Terminal window, navigate to the folder where you keep your Docker Com-
     pose file (polar-deployment/docker), and run the following command:

     $ docker-compose up -d config-service polar-postgres polar-keycloak

     After ensuring that all the containers are ready, run Catalog Service on the JVM
     (./gradlew bootRun), open a Terminal window, and send an HTTP GET request to the
     health endpoint:

     $ http :9001/actuator/health

     The endpoint will return the overall health status for the Catalog Service application,
     which can be one of UP, OUT_OF_SERVICE, DOWN, or UNKNOWN. When the health status is
     UP, the endpoint returns a 200 OK response. If it's not, it produces a 503 Service
     Unavailable response.

     {
        "status": "UP"

     }

     By default, Spring Boot Actuator only returns the overall health status. Through appli-
     cation properties, however, you can make it provide more specific information regard-
     ing several components used by the application. To better protect access to this kind
     of information, you can enable showing health details and components always
     (always) or only when the request is authorized (when_authorized). Since we're not

     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
           13.2 Health probes with Spring Boot Actuator and Kubernetes      459

protecting the Actuator endpoints at the application level, let's make the extra infor-
mation always available.

   Listing 13.8 Configuring the health endpoint to expose more information

management:                               Always shows details
   endpoints:                             about the application's
       web:                               health
          exposure:
              include: health                  Always shows information
   endpoint:                                   about the components used
       health:                                 by the application
          show-details: always
          show-components: always

Once again, rerun Catalog Service (./gradlew bootRun), and send an HTTP GET request
to http://localhost:9001/actuator/health. This time, the resulting JSON object con-
tains more detailed information about the application's health. Here's a partial result
as an example.

{                                  Detailed health information
   "components": {                 about components and features
       "clientConfigServer": {     used by the application

       "details": {

       "propertySources": [

                  "configserver:https://github.com/PolarBookshop/

config-repo/catalog-service.yml",

           "configClient"

       ]

       },

       "status": "UP"

   },

   "db": {

       "details": {

       "database": "PostgreSQL",

       "validationQuery": "isValid()"

       },

       "status": "UP"

      },                   Overall
      ...                  application
   },                      health status
   "status": "UP"

}

The generic health endpoint provided by Spring Boot Actuator is useful for monitor-
ing and configuring alerts or notifications, since it contains details regarding both the
application and the integration with its backing services. In the next section, you'll see
how to expose more specific information that's used by a deployment platform like
Kubernetes to manage containers.

    Before moving on, stop the application process (Ctrl-C), but keep all the current
containers running. You'll need them soon!

                     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
460                           CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

13.2.2 Configuring health probes in Spring Boot and Kubernetes

          Besides showing detailed information about the application's health, Spring Boot
          Actuator automatically detects when the application runs on a Kubernetes environ-
          ment and enables the health probes to return liveness (/actuator/health/liveness)
          and readiness (/actuator/health/readiness) states, as illustrated in figure 13.4:

                Liveness state--When an application is not live, this means it has entered a faulty
                   internal state from which it won't recover. By default, Kubernetes will try restart-
                   ing it to fix the problem.

                Readiness state--When an application is not ready, this means it can't process
                   new requests, either because it's still initializing all its components (during the
                   startup phase) or because it's overloaded. Kubernetes will stop forwarding
                   requests to that instance until it's ready to accept new requests again.

                Application health probes

                              Application

     Liveness?                             Readiness?

             DOWN                                     DOWN             Figure 13.4 Kubernetes
                                                                       uses liveness and readiness
     Restarting the                        Stop sending traffic to     probes to accomplish its
     application might solve               the application because     self-healing features in
     the problem.                          it's not ready to handle    case of failures.
                                           new requests.

     CUSTOMIZING LIVENESS AND READINESS PROBES
     To extend support for the health probes in any environment, you can configure
     Spring Boot Actuator through the dedicated properties. Open the Catalog Service
     project (catalog-service), and update the application.yml file as follows.

         Listing 13.9 Enabling liveness and readiness probes in any environment

     management:
        endpoints:

                              Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.2 Health probes with Spring Boot Actuator and Kubernetes  461

   web:                         Enables support
       exposure:                for the health
          include: health       probes

endpoint:
   health:
       show-details: always
       show-components: always
       probes:
          enabled: true

Let's check the result. All the backing services for Catalog Service should be up and
running on Docker from the previous section. If not, go back and follow the instruc-
tions to start them all (docker-compose up -d config-service polar-postgres
polar-keycloak). Then run Catalog Service on the JVM (./gradlew bootRun), and
invoke the endpoint for the liveness probe:

$ http :9001/actuator/health/liveness
{

   "status": "UP"
}

The liveness state of a Spring Boot application indicates whether it's in a correct or
broken internal state. If the Spring application context has started successfully, the
internal state is valid. It doesn't depend on any external components. Otherwise, it
will cause cascading failures, since Kubernetes will try to restart the broken instances.

    Finally, check the result for the readiness probe endpoint:

$ http :9001/actuator/health/readiness
{

   "status": "UP"
}

The readiness state of a Spring Boot application indicates whether it's ready to accept
traffic and process new requests. During the startup phase or graceful shutdown, the
application is not ready and will refuse any requests. It might also become temporarily
not ready if, at some point, it's overloaded. When it's not ready, Kubernetes will not
send any traffic to the application instance.

    When you're done testing the health endpoints, stop the application (Ctrl-C) and
the containers (docker-compose down).

   NOTE Go ahead and add Spring Boot Actuator to all the applications com-
   posing the Polar Bookshop system. In Order Service and Edge Service,
   remember to configure unauthenticated access to the Actuator endpoints in
   the SecurityConfig class, as we did for Catalog Service. In Dispatcher Service
   you'll also need to add a dependency on Spring WebFlux (org.springframe-
   work.boot:spring-boot-starter-webflux) because Actuator needs a web
   server configured to serve its endpoints over HTTP. Then configure the
   health endpoints for all the applications, as you learned in this section. As a

Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
462  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

        reference, you can look at the source code repository accompanying this book
        (Chapter13/13-end).

     By default, the readiness probe in Spring Boot doesn't depend on any external com-
     ponents. You can decide whether any external systems should be included in the read-
     iness probe.

         For example, Catalog Service is an external system for Order Service. Should you
     include it in the readiness probe? Since Order Service adopts resilience patterns to
     deal with the scenario where Catalog Service is unavailable, you should keep Catalog
     Service out of the readiness probe. When it's not available, Order Service will keep
     working correctly, but with graceful functionality degradation.

         Let's consider another example. Edge Service depends on Redis for storing and
     retrieving web session data. Should you include it in the readiness probe? Since Edge
     Service can't process any new requests without accessing Redis, including Redis in the
     readiness probe might be a good idea. Spring Boot Actuator will consider both the
     internal state of the application and the integration with Redis to determine whether
     the application is ready to accept new requests.

         In the Edge Service project (edge-service), open the application.yml file, and
     define which indicators to use in the readiness probe: the application standard read-
     iness state and the Redis health status. I'll assume you have already added Spring
     Boot Actuator to Edge Service and configured the health endpoints as described
     earlier.

     Listing 13.10 Including Redis in the computation of the readiness state

     management:                                      The readiness probe will combine
        endpoints:                                    the application's readiness state
            web:                                      and Redis's availability.
               exposure:
                   include: health
        endpoint:
            health:
               show-details: always
               show-components: always
               probes:
                   enabled: true
               group:
                   readiness:
                       include: readinessState,redis

     CONFIGURING LIVENESS AND READINESS PROBES IN KUBERNETES
     Kubernetes relies on the health probes (liveness and readiness) to accomplish its tasks
     as a container orchestrator. For example, when the desired state of an application is to
     have three replicas, Kubernetes ensures there are always three application instances
     running. If any of them doesn't return a 200 response from the liveness probe, Kuber-
     netes will restart it. When starting or upgrading an application instance, we'd like the
     process to happen without downtime for the user. Therefore, Kubernetes will not

     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
                    13.2 Health probes with Spring Boot Actuator and Kubernetes                463

enable an instance in the load balancer until it's ready to accept new requests (when
Kubernetes gets a 200 response from the readiness probe).

     Since liveness and readiness information is application-specific, Kubernetes
needs the application itself to declare how to retrieve that information. Relying on
Actuator, Spring Boot applications provide liveness and readiness probes as HTTP
endpoints. Let's see how we can configure Kubernetes to use those endpoints for
the health probes.

    In your Catalog Service project (catalog-service), open the Deployment manifest
(k8s/deployment.yml), and update it with configuration for liveness and readiness
probes as follows.

Listing 13.11 Configuring liveness and readiness probes for Catalog Service

apiVersion: apps/v1

kind: Deployment

metadata:

name: catalog-service

...

spec:

...

template:

...

spec:

                    containers:

                    - name: catalog-service

 Configuration      image: catalog-service   Uses an HTTP GET           The endpoint to
for the liveness    ...                      request to get the         call for the
                    livenessProbe:           liveness state             liveness state
           probe
                       httpGet:
  The port to use
      to fetch the  path: /actuator/health/liveness

    liveness state     port: 9001            An initial delay before starting
                    initialDelaySeconds: 10  checking the liveness state
                    periodSeconds: 5

The frequency       readinessProbe:                                     Configuration for the
  for checking         httpGet:                                         readiness probe
  the liveness             path: /actuator/health/readiness
          state            port: 9001

                    initialDelaySeconds: 5

                    periodSeconds: 15

Both probes can be configured so that Kubernetes will start using them after an initial
delay (initialDelaySeconds), and you can also define the frequency with which to
invoke them (periodSeconds). The initial delay should consider that the application
will take a few seconds to start, and it will depend on the available computational
resources. The polling period should not be too long, to reduce the time between the
application instance entering a faulty state and the platform taking action to self-heal.

   WARNING If you run these examples on resource-constrained environments,
   you might need to adjust the initial delay and the polling frequency to allow
   the application more time to start and get ready to accept requests. You might

                                 Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
464   CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

      need to do the same when running these examples on Apple Silicon comput-
      ers until ARM64 support is part of Paketo Buildpacks (you can follow the
      updates here: https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/stacks/issues/51). That's
      because AMD64 container images are run on the Apple Silicon computers
      (ARM64) through a compatibility layer based on Rosetta, which impacts appli-
      cation startup time.

      Go ahead and configure the liveness and readiness probes in the Deployment manifests
      for all the applications composing the Polar Bookshop system. As a reference, you can
      look at the source code repository accompanying this book (Chapter13/13-end).

          On top of event logs, health information improves the information we can infer
      about the application's internal state, but it's not enough to achieve complete visibil-
      ity. The following section will introduce the concept of metrics and how we can config-
      ure them in Spring Boot.

13.3  Metrics and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator,
      Prometheus, and Grafana

      To properly monitor, manage, and troubleshoot an application running in produc-
      tion, we need to be able to answer questions like "how much CPU and RAM is the
      application consuming?", "how many threads are used over time?", and "what's the
      rate of failing requests?" Event logs and health probes can't help us answer those ques-
      tions. We need something more. We need more data.

          Metrics are numeric data about the application, measured and aggregated in
      regular time intervals. We use metrics to track the occurrence of an event (such as
      an HTTP request being received), count items (such as the number of allocated
      JVM threads), measure the time taken to perform a task (such as the latency of a
      database query), or get the current value of a resource (such as current CPU and
      RAM consumption). This is all valuable information for understanding why an
      application behaves in a certain way. You can monitor metrics and set alerts or noti-
      fications for them.

          Spring Boot Actuator collects application metrics out of the box by leveraging the
      Micrometer library (https://micrometer.io). Micrometer contains instrumentation
      code for collecting valuable metrics from common components in a JVM-based appli-
      cation. It provides a vendor-neutral façade so that you can export the metrics col-
      lected from Micrometer using different formats, such as Prometheus/Open Metrics,
      Humio, Datadog, and VMware Tanzu Observability. Just as SLF4J provides a vendor-
      neutral façade for logging libraries, Micrometer does the same for metrics exporters.

          On top of the default Micrometer instrumentation libraries that are configured by
      Spring Boot, you can import additional instrumentation to collect metrics from spe-
      cific libraries like Resilience4J or even define your own without vendor lock-in.

          The most common format for exporting metrics is the one used by Prometheus, which
      is "an open-source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit" (https://prometheus.io).
      Just as Loki aggregates and stores event logs, Prometheus does the same with metrics.

      Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.3 Metrics and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator, Prometheus, and Grafana  465

    In this section you'll see how to configure metrics in Spring Boot. Then you'll use
Prometheus to aggregate metrics and Grafana to visualize them in dashboards.

13.3.1 Configuring metrics with Spring Boot Actuator and Micrometer

          Spring Boot Actuator auto-configures Micrometer out of the box to collect metrics
          about a Java application. One way of exposing such metrics is by enabling the /actua-
          tor/metrics HTTP endpoint implemented by Actuator. Let's see how to do that.

               In your Catalog Service project (catalog-service), update the application.yml file to
          expose the metrics endpoint via HTTP.

Listing 13.12 Exposing the metrics Actuator endpoint

management:                             Exposes both
   endpoints:                           health and
       web:                             metrics endpoints
          exposure:
              include: health, metrics

Ensure the backing services required by Catalog Service are up and running with the
following command:

$ docker-compose up -d polar-keycloak polar-postgres

Then run the application (./gradlew bootRun), and call the /actuator/metrics
endpoint:

$ http :9001/actuator/metrics

The result is a collection of metrics you can further explore by adding the name of a
metric to the endpoint (for example, /actuator/metrics/jvm.memory.used).

    Micrometer provides the instrumentation to generate those metrics, but you might
want to export them in a different format. After deciding which monitoring solution
you'd like to use to collect and store the metrics, you'll need to add a specific depen-
dency on that tool. In the Grafana observability stack, that tool is Prometheus.

    In the Catalog Service project (catalog-service), update the build.gradle file with a
dependency on the Micrometer library that provides integration with Prometheus.
Remember to refresh or reimport the Gradle dependencies after the new addition.

Listing 13.13 Adding dependency for Micrometer Prometheus

dependencies {
   ...
   runtimeOnly 'io.micrometer:micrometer-registry-prometheus'

}

Then update the application.yml file to expose the prometheus Actuator endpoint via
HTTP. You can also remove the more generic metrics endpoint, since we're not
going to use it anymore.

Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
466  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     Listing 13.14 Exposing the prometheus Actuator endpoint

     management:                                Exposes both health
        endpoints:                              and prometheus
            web:                                endpoints
               exposure:
                   include: health, prometheus

     The default strategy used by Prometheus is pull-based, meaning that a Prometheus
     instance scrapes (pulls) metrics in regular time intervals from the application via a dedi-
     cated endpoint, which is /actuator/prometheus in the Spring Boot scenario. Rerun the
     application (./gradlew bootRun), and call the Prometheus endpoint to check the result:

     $ http :9001/actuator/prometheus

     The result is the same collection of metrics you got from the metrics endpoint, but
     this time they are exported using a format understood by Prometheus. The following
     snippet shows an extract of the complete response, highlighting metrics related to the
     current number of threads:

     # HELP jvm_threads_states_threads The current number of threads
     # TYPE jvm_threads_states_threads gauge
     jvm_threads_states_threads{state="terminated",} 0.0
     jvm_threads_states_threads{state="blocked",} 0.0
     jvm_threads_states_threads{state="waiting",} 13.0
     jvm_threads_states_threads{state="timed-waiting",} 7.0
     jvm_threads_states_threads{state="new",} 0.0
     jvm_threads_states_threads{state="runnable",} 11.0

     This format is based on plain text and is called Prometheus exposition format. Given the
     wide adoption of Prometheus for generating and exporting metrics, this format has
     been polished and standardized in OpenMetrics (https://openmetrics.io), a CNCF-
     incubating project. Spring Boot supports both the original Prometheus format (the
     default behavior) and OpenMetrics, depending on the Accept header of the HTTP
     request. If you'd like to get metrics according to the OpenMetrics format, you need to
     ask for it explicitly:

     $ http :9001/actuator/prometheus \
            'Accept:application/openmetrics-text; version=1.0.0; charset=utf-8'

     When you're done analyzing the Prometheus metrics, stop the application (Ctrl-C)
     and all the containers (docker-compose down).

        NOTE You might encounter scenarios where you need to collect metrics from
        ephemeral applications or batch jobs that don't run long enough to be
        pulled. In that case, Spring Boot lets you adopt a push-based strategy so that
        the application itself sends metrics to the Prometheus server. The official
        documentation explains how to configure such behavior (http://spring.io/
        projects/spring-boot).

     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.3 Metrics and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator, Prometheus, and Grafana  467

          Spring Boot Actuator relies on the Micrometer instrumentation and provides auto-
          configuration to generate metrics for various technologies you might use in your
          applications: JVM, loggers, Spring MVC, Spring WebFlux, RestTemplate, WebClient,
          data sources, Hibernate, Spring Data, RabbitMQ, and more.

               When Spring Cloud Gateway is in the classpath, as in the case of Edge Service,
          additional metrics are exported regarding the gateway routes. Some libraries, like
          Resilience4J, contribute dedicated Micrometer instrumentation through specific
          dependencies to register additional metrics.

               Open the build.gradle file in the Edge Service project (edge-service), and add the
          following dependency to include Micrometer instrumentation for Resilience4J.
          Remember to refresh or reimport the Gradle dependencies after the new addition.

                Listing 13.15 Adding dependency for Micrometer Resilience4J

             dependencies {
                 ...
                 runtimeOnly 'io.github.resilience4j:resilience4j-micrometer'

             }

          Now that we've configured Spring Boot to expose metrics, let's see how we can config-
          ure Prometheus to scrape them and Grafana to visualize them.

13.3.2 Monitoring metrics with Prometheus and Grafana

          Like Loki, Prometheus collects and stores metrics. It even provides a GUI to visual-
          ize them and to define alarms, but we'll use Grafana for that since it's a more com-
          prehensive tool.

               Metrics are stored as time-series data, containing the timestamp when they were regis-
          tered and, optionally, labels. In Prometheus, labels are key/value pairs that add more
          information to the metric being recorded. For example, a metric registering the number
          of threads used by the application could be enhanced with labels qualifying the state of
          the threads (such as blocked, waiting, or idle). Labels help aggregate and query metrics.

               Micrometer provides the concept of tags, which are equivalent to Prometheus's labels.
          In Spring Boot you can leverage configuration properties to define common labels for all
          the metrics produced by an application. For example, it's useful to add an application
          label that tags each metric with the name of the application that produces it.

               Open the Catalog Service project (catalog-service), go to the application.yml file,
          and define a Micrometer tag with the application's name, which will result in a label
          that's applied to all metrics. Since the application name is already defined in the
          spring.application.name property, let's reuse that instead of duplicating the value.

                Listing 13.16 Tagging all metrics with the application name

             management:
                 endpoints:
                    web:

Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
468               CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

            exposure:                                    Adds a Micrometer
               include: health, prometheus               common tag with the
                                                         application name. This
     endpoint:                                           results in a Prometheus
        health:                                          label being applied to all
            show-details: always                         metrics.
            show-components: always
            probes:
               enabled: true

     metrics:
        tags:
            application: ${spring.application.name}

     With this change, all metrics will have an application label with the application
     name, which is very useful when querying metrics and building dashboards to visual-
     ize them in Grafana:

     jvm_threads_states_threads{application="catalog-service",

     state="waiting",} 13.0

     You have already encountered Grafana when working with logs. Just as you browsed
     logs using Loki as a data source for Grafana, you can query metrics using Prometheus
     as a data source. Furthermore, you can use the metrics stored by Prometheus to
     define dashboards, graphically visualize data, and set alarms or notifications when cer-
     tain metrics return known critical values. For example, when the rate of failing HTTP
     requests per minute goes above a certain threshold, you might want to get an alarm or
     a notification so you can act on it. Figure 13.5 illustrates the monitoring architecture.

         In your Polar Deployment project (polar-deployment), update the Docker Compose
     configuration (docker/docker-compose.yml) to include Prometheus. Grafana is already

     Monitoring architecture using the Grafana stack

     Application                                                     Grafana
     [Container]                                                   [Container]

                                                     Platform for querying, visualizing,
                                                       and alerting on metrics, logs,
                                                                    and traces

                                                     Queries metrics from

                  Scrapes metrics from                  Prometheus
                                                         [Container]

                                                     Monitoring system

     Figure 13.5 Monitoring architecture for cloud native applications based on the Grafana stack

                  Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.3 Metrics and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator, Prometheus, and Grafana  469

configured to use Prometheus as a data source in the configuration files you imported into
your project earlier from Chapter13/13-end/polar-deployment/docker/observability.

Listing 13.17 Defining Prometheus container for collecting metrics

version: "3.8"
services:

   ...

grafana:

image: grafana/grafana:9.1.2

container_name: grafana

depends_on:              Ensures Prometheus
   - loki                is started before
   - prometheus          Grafana

...

prometheus:

image: prom/prometheus:v2.38.0

container_name: prometheus      Volumes are used to
ports:                          load configuration for
                                Prometheus scraping.
   - "9090:9090"
volumes:

- ./observability/prometheus/prometheus.yml:/etc/prometheus/

 prometheus.yml

Unlike Loki, we don't need a dedicated component to collect metrics from the appli-
cations. The Prometheus Server container can both collect and store metrics.

    Next, open a Terminal window, navigate to the folder where you keep your Docker
Compose file (polar-deployment/docker), and run the complete monitoring stack
with the following command:

$ docker-compose up -d grafana

The Prometheus container is configured to poll metrics every 2 seconds from all the
Spring Boot applications in Polar Bookshop when they run as containers. Package
Catalog Service as a container image (./gradlew bootBuildImage), and run it from
Docker Compose:

$ docker-compose up -d catalog-service

Send a few requests to Catalog Service (http :9001/books), and then open a browser
window and go to Grafana at http://localhost:3000 (user/password). In the Explore
section, you can query metrics like you browsed logs. Choose Prometheus as the data
source, select Last 5 Minutes from the time drop-down menu, and query the metrics
related to the JVM memory used by the application as follows (figure 13.6):

jvm_memory_used_bytes{application="catalog-service"}

The metrics data can be used to draw dashboards for monitoring different application
aspects. Select Dashboards > Manage from the left menu, and explore the dashboards
I have included in Grafana, grouped within the Application folder.

                 Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
470  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

    Figure 13.6 In Grafana, you can browse and query metrics aggregated and stored by Prometheus.

          For example, open the JVM Dashboard (figure 13.7). It visualizes different metrics
          regarding the JVM where Spring Boot applications run, such as CPU usage, heap
          memory, non-heap memory, garbage collections, and threads.
          On the Dashboards page, explore the other dashboards I have configured to get more
          visibility into the Polar Bookshop applications. Each dashboard is enhanced with addi-
          tional information on its goal and how to use it.

               When you're done checking the application metrics in Grafana, stop all the con-
          tainers (docker-compose down).

13.3.3 Configuring Prometheus metrics in Kubernetes
          When running applications in Kubernetes, we can use dedicated annotations to mark
          which containers the Prometheus server should scrape and inform it about the HTTP
          endpoint and port number to call.
               You'll have the chance to test this setup later in the book, where we'll deploy the
          full Grafana observability stack in a production Kubernetes cluster. For now, let's
          prepare the Deployment manifests for all of the Spring Boot applications in Polar

                                                   Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.3 Metrics and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator, Prometheus, and Grafana     471

Figure 13.7 In Grafana, dashboards can be used to visualize Prometheus metrics.

Bookshop. For example, the following listing shows how to change the Catalog Ser-
vice manifest (catalog-service/k8s/deployment.yml).

Listing 13.18 Annotating Catalog Service for Prometheus metrics scraping

apiVersion: apps/v1

kind: Deployment

metadata:

name: catalog-service

labels:

app: catalog-service

spec:

replicas: 1

selector:

matchLabels:

       app: catalog-service                              Signals that Prometheus
template:                                                should scrape containers
                                                         in this Pod
   metadata:
       labels:

          app: catalog-service                                                   Identifies the HTTP
       annotations:                                                              endpoint that exposes
                                                                                 Prometheus metrics
          prometheus.io/scrape: "true"
          prometheus.io/path: /actuator/prometheus

          prometheus.io/port: "9001"  Specifies the port number where
...                                   the metrics endpoint is available

                  Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
472  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

          Annotations in Kubernetes manifests should be of type String, which is why quotes are
          needed in the case of values that could be mistakenly parsed as numbers or Boolean.

               Go ahead and configure metrics and Prometheus for all the remaining applica-
          tions in the Polar Bookshop system, including the configuration for the Kubernetes
          manifests. As a reference, you can look at the source code repository accompanying
          this book (Chapter13/13-end).

               The next section will cover another type of telemetry we need in order to monitor
          applications and make them observable: traces.

13.4 Distributed tracing with OpenTelemetry and Tempo

          Event logs, health probes, and metrics provide a wide variety of valuable data for infer-
          ring the internal state of an application. However, none of them consider that cloud
          native applications are distributed systems. A user request is likely to be processed by
          multiple applications, but so far we have no way to correlate data across application
          boundaries.

               A simple way to solve that problem could be to generate an identifier for each
          request at the edge of the system (a correlation ID), use it in event logs, and pass it over
          to the other services involved. By using that correlation ID, we could fetch all log mes-
          sages related to a particular transaction from multiple applications.

               If we follow that idea further, we'll get to distributed tracing, a technique for track-
          ing requests as they flow through a distributed system, letting us localize where errors
          occur and troubleshoot performance issues. There are three main concepts in dis-
          tributed tracing:

                A trace represents the activities associated with a request or a transaction, identi-
                   fied uniquely by a trace ID. It's composed of one or more spans across one or
                   more services.

                Each step of the request processing is called a span, characterized by start and
                   end timestamps and identified uniquely by the pair trace ID and span ID.

                Tags are metadata that provide additional information regarding the span con-
                   text, such as the request URI, the username of the currently logged-in user, or
                   the tenant identifier.

          Let's consider an example. In Polar Bookshop, you can fetch books through the gate-
          way (Edge Service), and the request is then forwarded to Catalog Service. The trace
          related to handling such a request would involve these two applications and at least
          three spans:

                The first span is the step performed by Edge Service to accept the initial HTTP
                   request.

                The second span is the step performed by Edge Service to route the request to
                   Catalog Service.

                The third span is the step performed by Catalog Service to handle the routed
                   request.

     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.4 Distributed tracing with OpenTelemetry and Tempo  473

There are multiple choices related to distributed tracing systems. First, we must
choose the format and protocol we'll use to generate and propagate traces. For this
we'll use OpenTelemetry (also called OTel ), a CNCF-incubating project that is quickly
becoming the de facto standard for distributed tracing and aims at unifying the collec-
tion of telemetry data (https://opentelemetry.io).

    Next we need to choose whether to use OpenTelemetry directly (with the Open-
Telemetry Java instrumentation) or rely on a façade that instruments the code in a
vendor-neutral way and integrates with different distributed tracing systems (such as
Spring Cloud Sleuth). We'll go with the first option.

    Once the applications are instrumented for distributed tracing, we'll need a tool to
collect and store traces. In the Grafana observability stack, the distributed tracing
backend of choice is Tempo, a project that "lets you scale tracing as far as possible with
minimal operational cost and less complexity than ever before" (https://grafana.com/
oss/tempo). Unlike the way we used Prometheus, Tempo follows a push-based strat-
egy where the application itself pushes data to the distributed tracing backend.

    This section will show you how to complete the Grafana observability setup with
Tempo and use it to collect and store traces. Then I'll show you how to use the Open-
Telemetry Java instrumentation in your Spring Boot applications to generate and send
traces to Tempo. Finally, you'll learn how to query traces from Grafana.

OpenTelemetry, Spring Cloud Sleuth, and Micrometer Tracing

A few standards have emerged for implementing distributed tracing and defining
guidelines for generating and propagating traces and spans. OpenZipkin is the more
mature project (https://zipkin.io). OpenTracing and OpenCensus are more recent
projects that have tried to standardize ways of instrumenting application code to sup-
port distributed tracing. They are both deprecated now, since they joined forces to work
on OpenTelemetry: the ultimate framework to "instrument, generate, collect, and
export telemetry data (metrics, logs, and traces)." Tempo supports all those options.

Spring Cloud Sleuth (https://spring.io/projects/spring-cloud-sleuth) is a project that
provides auto-configuration for distributed tracing in Spring Boot applications. It takes
care of instrumenting commonly used libraries in Spring applications and provides an
abstraction layer on top of specific distributed tracing libraries. OpenZipkin is the
default choice.

In this book, I decided to show you how to use the OpenTelemetry Java instrumenta-
tion directly for two main reasons. First, support for OpenTelemetry in Spring Cloud
Sleuth is still experimental and not ready for production at the time of writing (https://
github.com/spring-projects-experimental/spring-cloud-sleuth-otel).

Second, Spring Cloud Sleuth will not be developed further once Spring Framework 6
and Spring Boot 3 are released. The Spring project donated the Sleuth core frame-
work to Micrometer and created a new Micrometer Tracing subproject aiming to pro-
vide a vendor-neutral façade for traces, similar to what Micrometer already does for
metrics. Micrometer Tracing will provide support for OpenZipkin and OpenTelemetry.
Based on Micrometer Tracing, code instrumentation will become a core aspect of all
Spring libraries as part of the Spring Observability initiative.

Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
474                   CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

13.4.1 Managing traces with Tempo and Grafana

          A distributed tracing backend is responsible for aggregating, storing, and making
          traces searchable. Tempo is the solution in the Grafana observability stack. Figure 13.8
          illustrates the tracing architecture.

     Distributed tracing architecture using the Grafana stack

       Application                    Grafana
       [Container]                  [Container]
                      Platform for querying, visualizing,
     Sends traces to    and alerting on metrics, logs,
                                     and traces

                               Queries traces from

                                      Tempo
                                    [Container]
                          Distributed tracing system

     Figure 13.8 Distributed tracing architecture for cloud native applications based on the
     Grafana stack

        NOTE Most vendors support OpenTelemetry, so you can easily swap your dis-
        tributed tracing backend without changing anything in your applications. For
        example, instead of Tempo, you could send traces to other platforms like
        Honeycomb, Lightstep, or VMware Tanzu Observability.

     First, let's update the Docker Compose file for Polar Bookshop to include Tempo
     (polar-deployment/docker/docker-compose.yml). Grafana is already configured to
     use Tempo as a data source in the configuration files you imported earlier into your
     project from Chapter13/13-end/polar-deployment/docker/observability.

         Listing 13.19 Defining a Tempo container for collecting and storing traces

     version: "3.8"
     services:

        ...

        grafana:
            image: grafana/grafana:9.1.2
            container_name: grafana
            depends_on:

                      Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
        13.4 Distributed tracing with OpenTelemetry and Tempo                                475

   - loki                         Ensures Tempo is
   - prometheus                   started before
   - tempo                        Grafana
...

tempo:

image: grafana/tempo:1.5.0

container_name: tempo

command: -config.file /etc/tempo-config.yml                            Loads the custom
ports:                                                                 configuration during
                                                                       the startup phase
   - "4317:4317"
volumes:

- ./observability/tempo/tempo.yml:/etc/tempo-config.yml

Volumes are used to load
configuration for Tempo.

Port to accept traces using the
OpenTelemetry protocol over gRPC

Next let's run the full Grafana observability stack on Docker. Open a Terminal win-
dow, navigate to the folder where you keep your Docker Compose file, and run the
following command:

$ docker-compose up -d grafana

Tempo is now ready to accept OpenTelemetry traces over gRPC on port 4317. In the
next section, you'll see how to update a Spring Boot application to generate traces
and send them over to Tempo.

13.4.2 Configuring tracing in Spring Boot with OpenTelemetry

          The OpenTelemetry project includes instrumentation that generates traces and spans
          for the most common Java libraries, including Spring, Tomcat, Netty, Reactor, JDBC,
          Hibernate, and Logback. The OpenTelemetry Java Agent is a JAR artifact provided by
          the project that can be attached to any Java application. It injects the necessary byte-
          code dynamically to capture traces and spans from all those libraries, and it exports
          them in different formats without you having to change your Java source code.

               Java agents are often provided to the application at runtime from the outside. For
          better dependency management capabilities, in this case, I prefer using Gradle (or
          Maven) to include the agent JAR file in the final application artifact. Let's see how.

               Open your Catalog Service project (catalog-service). Then add a dependency on
          the OpenTelemetry Java Agent in your build.gradle file. Remember to refresh or
          reimport the Gradle dependencies after the new addition.

Listing 13.20 Adding dependency for OpenTelemetry Java Agent in Catalog Service

ext {                                               The OpenTelemetry
   ...                                              version
   set('otelVersion', "1.17.0")

}

                          Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
476               CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     dependencies {                                      The OpenTelemetry agent
                                                         instrumenting the Java code
        ...                                              dynamically via bytecode

        runtimeOnly "io.opentelemetry.javaagent:

        opentelemetry-javaagent:${otelVersion}"

     }

     Besides instrumenting the Java code to capture traces, the OpenTelemetry Java Agent
     also integrates with SLF4J (and its implementation). It provides trace and span identi-
     fiers as contextual information that can be injected into log messages through the
     MDC abstraction provided by SLF4J. That makes it extremely simple to navigate from
     log messages to traces and vice versa, achieving better visibility into the application
     than querying the telemetry in isolation.

         Let's expand on the default log format used by Spring Boot and add the following
     contextual information:

          Application name (value from the spring.application.name property we con-
             figured for all applications)

          Trace identifier (value from the trace_id field populated by the OpenTeleme-
             try agent, when enabled)

          Span identifier (value from the span_id field populated by the OpenTelemetry
             agent, when enabled)

     In your Catalog Service project, open the application.yml file, and add the three new
     pieces of information next to the log level (represented by %5p) following the Log-
     back syntax. This is the same format used by Spring Cloud Sleuth.

     Listing 13.21 Adding contextual information to logs, next to the level field

     logging:                                     Includes application name, trace ID, and
        pattern:                                        span ID next to the log level (%5p)

     level: "%5p [${spring.application.name},%X{trace_id},%X{span_id}]"

     Next, open a Terminal window, navigate to the Catalog Service root folder, and run
     ./gradlew bootBuildImage to package the application as a container image.

         The final step is configuring and enabling the OpenTelemetry Java Agent. For sim-
     plicity, we'll enable OpenTelemetry only when running applications in containers and
     rely on environment variables to configure it.

         We need three pieces of configuration to successfully enable tracing:

          Instruct the JVM to load the OpenTelemetry Java agent. We can do that via the
             JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS standard environment variable supported by OpenJDK to
             provide additional configuration to the JVM.

          Use the application name to tag and categorize traces. We'll use the OTEL_SERVICE_
             NAME environment variable supported by the OpenTelemetry Java agent.

          Define the URL of the distributed tracing backend. In our case, it's Tempo on port 4317,
             and it can be configured via the OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT environment

                  Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.4 Distributed tracing with OpenTelemetry and Tempo                          477

        variable supported by the OpenTelemetry Java agent. By default, traces are sent
        over gRPC.

Go to your Polar Deployment project (polar-deployment), and open the Docker Com-
pose file (docker/docker-compose.yml). Then add the necessary configuration to
Catalog Service to support tracing.

Listing 13.22 Defining OpenTelemetry for the Catalog Service container

version: "3.8"
services:

   ...

catalog-service:

depends_on:

- fluent-bit              Ensures Tempo
- polar-keycloak          is started before
- polar-postgres          Catalog Service
- tempo

image: "catalog-service"

container_name: "catalog-service"

ports:                 Instructs the JVM to run the OpenTelemetry Java
   - 9001:9001      agent from the path where Cloud Native Buildpacks
   - 8001:8001
                                      placed the application dependencies
environment:

- JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS=-javaagent:/workspace/BOOT-INF/lib/

 opentelemetry-javaagent-1.17.0.jar

- OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=catalog-service

- OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://tempo:4317

           - OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=none            The URL of the distributed
       ...                                   tracing backend supporting the
                                             OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP)
The name of the application, used to tag
the traces produced by Catalog Service

Finally, from the same folder, run Catalog Service as a container:

$ docker-compose up -d catalog-service

Once the application is up and running, send a few requests to trigger the generation
of some logs and traces about your HTTP requests:

$ http :9001/books

Then check the logs from the container (docker logs catalog-service). You'll see
that each log message now has a new section containing the application name and,
when available, the trace and span identifiers:

[catalog-service,d9e61c8cf853fe7fdf953422c5ff567a,eef9e08caea9e32a]

Distributed tracing helps us follow a request through multiple services, so we need
another application to test whether it works correctly. Go ahead and make the same

                    Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
478  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     changes to Edge Service to support OpenTelemetry. Then run the application as a
     container from your Docker Compose file:

     $ docker-compose up -d edge-service

     Once again, send a few requests to trigger the generation of some logs and traces
     about your HTTP requests. This time you should go through the gateway:

     $ http :9000/books

     Using the trace ID logged by Catalog Service, we can retrieve (correlate) all the steps
     involved in processing the HTTP request to the /books endpoint started in Edge Ser-
     vice. Being able to navigate from logs to traces (and the other way around) is
     extremely useful for getting more visibility into all the steps involved in processing a
     request throughout a distributed system. Let's see how it works in the Grafana stack.

         Open a browser window, go to Grafana (http://localhost:3000), and log in with
     the credentials configured in Docker Compose (user/password). On the Explore
     page, check the logs for Catalog Service ({container_name="/catalog-service"}),
     much like we did earlier. Next, click on the most recent log message to get more
     details. You'll see a Tempo button next to the trace identifier associated with that log
     message. If you click that, Grafana redirects you to the related trace using data from
     Tempo, all in the same view (figure 13.9).

Figure 13.9 In Grafana, you can navigate from logs (Loki) to traces (Tempo) using the trace ID included in the logs.
                                                   Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
      13.5 Application management and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator  479

      When you're done inspecting logs and traces, stop all the containers (docker-com-
      pose down). Before moving on, go ahead and configure OpenTelemetry for all the
      remaining applications in the Polar Bookshop system. As a reference, you can look at
      the source code repository accompanying this book (Chapter13/13-end).

          So far, we have worked with the three main types of telemetry data: logs, metrics,
      and traces. We also enabled health endpoints to provide additional information
      regarding application status. The following section will cover how you can retrieve
      even more information from the applications and achieve better visibility into their
      operations.

13.5  Application management and monitoring
      with Spring Boot Actuator

      In the previous sections, I've shown you the primary telemetry data that all cloud
      native applications should provide to achieve better observability. This final section
      will be dedicated to some specific information you can retrieve from applications to
      further enhance what you can infer about their operations.

          Spring Boot Actuator provides many features to make your applications produc-
      tion-ready. You have already learned about health and metrics endpoints, but there
      are more. Table 13.1 lists some of the most useful management and monitoring end-
      points implemented by Actuator. This section will show you how to use some of them.

      Table 13.1 Some of the most useful management and monitoring endpoints exposed by Spring Boot
      Actuator.

      Endpoint      Description

      /beans        Shows a list of all the Spring beans managed by the application
      /configprops  Shows a list of all the @ConfigurationProperties-annotated beans
      /env          Shows a list of all the properties available to the Spring Environment
      /flyway       Lists all the migrations run by Flyway and their statuses
      /health       Shows information about the application's health
      /heapdump     Returns a heap dump file
      /info         Shows arbitrary application information
      /loggers      Shows the configuration of all the loggers in the application and allows you to
                    modify them
      /metrics      Returns metrics about the application
      /mappings     Lists all the paths defined in web controllers
      /prometheus   Returns metrics about the application either in Prometheus or OpenMetrics format
      /sessions     Lists all the active sessions managed by Spring Session and allows you to delete them
      /threaddump   Returns a thread dump in JSON format

                    Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
480  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

13.5.1 Monitoring Flyway migrations in Spring Boot

          In chapters 5 and 8, you saw how to version-control your database schemas using Fly-
          way migrations and integrate them with Spring Boot, both in imperative and reactive
          stacks. Flyway keeps the history of all the migrations run on the application in a dedi-
          cated table in the database. It would be convenient to extract such information and
          monitor it, so you could be alerted if any migration should fail.

               Spring Boot Actuator provides a dedicated endpoint (/actuator/flyway) to dis-
          play information about all the migrations run by Flyway, including their status, date,
          type, and version. As you learned in the previous sections, you can enable new HTTP
          endpoints to be implemented by Actuator through the management.endpoints.web
          .exposure.include property. Let's see that in action.

              NOTE If you use Liquibase instead of Flyway, Spring Boot Actuator provides
              an /actuator/liquibase endpoint.

          Open the Catalog Service project (catalog-service), go to the application.yml file, and
          configure the Flyway endpoint to be exposed over HTTP by Spring Boot Actuator.

        Listing 13.23 Exposing the flyway Actuator endpoint     Adds flyway to the list
                                                                of Actuator endpoints
     management:                                                exposed over HTTP
        endpoints:
            web:
               exposure:
                   include: flyway, health, prometheus

     Then run the backing services required by Catalog Service as a container. From your
     Docker Compose file, execute the following command:

     $ docker-compose up -d polar-keycloak polar-postgres

     Next, run Catalog Service (./gradlew bootRun), and call the Flyway endpoint:

     $ http :9001/actuator/flyway

     The result is a JSON file containing the list of all migrations run by Flyway and their
     details. The following snippet shows an extract of the complete response:

     {                                                          The checksum of the
        "contexts": {                                           migration script, used
            "catalog-service": {                                to ensure the file has
               "flywayBeans": {                                 not been changed
                   "flyway": {
                       "migrations": [                                  Description of
                          {                                             the migration
                              "checksum": -567578088,
                              "description": "Initial schema",
                              "executionTime": 66,
                              "installedBy": "user",

     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
         13.5 Application management and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator  481

                  "installedOn": "2022-03-19T17:06:54Z",                       When the migration
                                                                               was performed
                  "installedRank": 1,
                                                                            The name of the
                  "script": "V1__Initial_schema.sql",                       script containing the
                                                                            migration code
                  "state": "SUCCESS",
                                                                          The state of the
  The type of            "type": "SQL",  The migration version            migration execution
   migration             "version": "1"  (as defined in the
                     },                  script filename)
(SQL or Java)        ...
                  ]

               }

         }

      }

   }

}

13.5.2 Exposing application information

          Among all the endpoints implemented by Spring Boot Actuator, /actuator/info is
          the most peculiar one, since it doesn't return any data. Instead, it's up to you to define
          what data you consider useful.

               One way to contribute data for the endpoint is through configuration properties.
          For example, go to your Catalog Service project (catalog-service), open the applica-
          tion.yml file, and add the following property to include the name of the system of
          which Catalog Service is part. You'll also need to enable the info endpoint to be
          exposed through HTTP (similar to what we did with the other endpoints) and enable
          the env contributor responsible for parsing all the properties with the info. prefix.

   Listing 13.24 Exposing and configuring the info Actuator endpoint

info:

   system: Polar Bookshop                Any property starting            Adds info to the list of
                                         with the "info." prefix          Actuator endpoints to
management:                              will be returned by              be exposed over HTTP
   endpoints:                            the info endpoint.
       web:

         exposure:

               include: flyway, health, info, prometheus

   info:                                 Enables environmental info
      env:                               fetched from "info." properties
          enabled: true

You can also include information that's generated automatically by Gradle or Maven
regarding the application build or the last Git commit. Let's see how we can add
details about the application's build configuration. In your Catalog Service project, go
to the build.gradle file and configure the springBoot task to generate build informa-
tion that will be parsed into a BuildProperties object and included in the result from
the info endpoint.

                    Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
482                           CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     Listing 13.25 Configuring Spring Boot to include build information

     springBoot {             Stores build information in a META-
        buildInfo()           INF/build-info.properties file parsed
                              by a BuildProperties object.
     }

     Let's test it out. Rerun Catalog Service (./gradlew bootRun). Then invoke the info
     endpoint:

     $ http :9001/actuator/info

     The result will be a JSON object containing build information and the custom info
     .system property we defined explicitly:

     {
        "build": {
            "artifact": "catalog-service",
            "group": "com.polarbookshop",
            "name": "catalog-service",
            "time": "2021-08-06T12:56:25.035Z",
            "version": "0.0.1-SNAPSHOT"
        },
        "system": "Polar Bookshop"

     }

     You can expose additional information about the operating system and the Java ver-
     sion in use. Both can be enabled via configuration properties. Let's update the appli-
     cation.yml file for the Catalog Service project as follows.

     Listing 13.26 Adding Java and OS details to the info Actuator endpoint

     management:                 Enables Java information
        ...                      in the info endpoint
        info:
            env:                   Enables OS information
               enabled: true       in the info endpoint
            java:
               enabled: true
            os:
               enabled: true

     Let's test it out. Rerun Catalog Service (./gradlew bootRun). Then invoke the info
     endpoint:

     $ http :9001/actuator/info

     The result now includes additional information about the Java version and operating
     system in use, which will be different depending on where you run the application:

     {
        ...

                              Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
13.5 Application management and monitoring with Spring Boot Actuator           483

   "java": {
       "version": "17.0.3",
       "vendor": {
          "name": "Eclipse Adoptium",
          "version": "Temurin-17.0.3+7"
       },
       "runtime": {
          "name": "OpenJDK Runtime Environment",
          "version": "17.0.3+7"
       },
       "jvm": {
          "name": "OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM",
          "vendor": "Eclipse Adoptium",
          "version": "17.0.3+7"
       }

   },
   "os": {

       "name": "Mac OS X",
       "version": "12.3.1",
       "arch": "aarch64"
   }
}

13.5.3 Generating and analyzing heap dumps

          Among the most annoying errors to debug in Java applications, memory leaks are
          probably the first that come to mind. Monitoring tools should alert you when a mem-
          ory leak pattern is detected, usually inferred if the JVM heap usage metric keeps
          increasing over time. If you don't catch the memory leak in advance, the application
          will throw the dreaded OutOfMemoryError error and crash.

               Once you suspect an application might suffer from a memory leak, you must find
          out which objects are held in memory and block the garbage collection. There are dif-
          ferent ways to proceed with finding problematic objects. For example, you could
          enable the Java Flight Recorder or attach a profiler like jProfiler to the running appli-
          cation. Another way is to take a snapshot of all the Java objects in the JVM heap mem-
          ory (a heap dump), and analyze it with a specialized tool to find the root cause of the
          memory leak.

               Spring Boot Actuator provides a convenient endpoint (/actuator/heapdump) that
          you can call to generate a heap dump. Let's see that in action. Go to your Catalog Ser-
          vice project (catalog-service), open the application.yml file, and configure Actuator to
          expose the heapdump endpoint.

Listing 13.27 Exposing the heapdump Actuator endpoint

management:                                        Adds heapdump to the list
   endpoints:                                     of Actuator endpoints to be
       web:
          exposure:                                         exposed over HTTP

include: flyway, health, heapdump, info, prometheus

                     Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
484  CHAPTER 13 Observability and monitoring

     Next, build and run Catalog Service (./gradlew bootRun). Finally, invoke the heapdump
     endpoint:

     $ http --download :9001/actuator/heapdump

     The command will save a heapdump.bin file in the current directory. You can then
     open it in a dedicated tool for heap analysis like VisualVM (https://visualvm.github.io)
     or JDK Mission Control (https://adoptopenjdk.net/jmc.html). Figure 13.10 shows an
     example of heap analysis in VisualVM.

Figure 13.10 VisualVM provides tools to analyze a Java application's heap dump.

          Finally, stop the application process (Ctrl-C) and all containers (docker-compose down).
               I encourage you to check out the Spring Boot Actuator official documentation, try

          out all the supported endpoints, and make the applications of the Polar Bookshop sys-
          tem more observable. For inspiration, refer to the source code repository accompany-
          ing the book to see which endpoints I have enabled on each application (Chapter13/
          13-end). They're powerful tools that you'll likely find helpful and convenient in real-
          world applications running in production.

        Summary

                Observability is a property of cloud native applications that measures how well
                   we can infer the internal state of an application from its outputs.

                Monitoring is about controlling known faulty states. Observability goes beyond
                   that and permits us to ask questions about the unknown.

                Logs (or event logs) are discrete records of something that happened over time
                   in a software application.

                                                   Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
Summary                                485

 Spring Boot supports logging through SLF4J, which provides a façade over the
   most common logging libraries.

 By default, logs are printed through the standard output as recommended by
   the 15-Factor methodology.

 Using the Grafana observability stack, Fluent Bit collects logs produced by all
   applications and forwards them to Loki, which stores them and makes them
   searchable. Then you can use Grafana to navigate the logs.

 Applications should expose health endpoints to check their status.
 Spring Boot Actuator exposes an overall health endpoint showing the status

   of the application and all the components or services it might use. It also pro-
   vides specialized endpoints to be used as liveness and readiness probes by
   Kubernetes.
 When the liveness probe is down, it means the application has entered an unre-
   coverable faulty state, so Kubernetes will try to restart it.
 When the readiness probe is down, the application is not ready to handle
   requests, so Kubernetes will stop any traffic directed to that instance.
 Metrics are numeric data about the application, measured at regular time
   intervals.
 Spring Boot Actuator leverages the Micrometer façade to instrument the Java
   code, generate metrics, and expose them through a dedicated endpoint.
 When the Prometheus client is on the classpath, Spring Boot can expose met-
   rics in the Prometheus or OpenMetrics format.
 Using the Grafana observability stack, Prometheus aggregates and stores met-
   rics from all applications. Then you can use Grafana to query metrics, design
   dashboards, and set alerts.
 Distributed tracing, a technique for tracking requests as they flow through a dis-
   tributed system, lets us localize where errors occur in a distributed system and
   troubleshoot performance issues.
 Traces are characterized by a trace ID and are composed of multiple spans, rep-
   resenting steps in a transaction.
 The OpenTelemetry project includes APIs and instrumentation that generates
   traces and spans for the most common Java libraries.
 The OpenTelemetry Java Agent is a JAR artifact provided by the project that can
   be attached to any Java application. It injects the necessary bytecode dynamically
   to capture traces and spans from all those libraries and export them in different
   formats without having to change your Java source code explicitly.
 Using the Grafana observability stack, Tempo aggregates and stores metrics
   from all applications. Then you can use Grafana to query traces and correlate
   them with logs.
 Spring Boot Actuator provides management and monitoring endpoints to fulfill
   any requirements you might have to make your applications production-ready.

Licensed to Zhigang Li <lzg14@qq.com>
